---
layout: post
title: API's for the non-technical guy (or gal)
---

A friend a work recently asked me to explain to her what an API is. Our company collects, gernates, and processes many terabytes of data each day and while we do have a traditional web protal for clients some prefer to use our API's directly. She works in the marketing department and was just tasked with starting work on a new campaign to raise awarness about our API's. The problem, she doesn't really understand what API's are. Everything she found online was either overly technical or treated her like a child by making weak analogies to car parts or wires. I'm certain that if I took the time I could find an article comparing API's to burritos. This article is meant to sit squarely in the middle of those two extremes; it is for the intelligent, computer literate individual who needs only needs to know what API's are and why they are useful. 

Anyone who has read a review or seen an advertisment for a computer or piece of software has probably heard the acronym UI or user interface. UI and API are two sides of the same coin so we will begin there. 

User interfaces are how humans interact with technology and can be anything form the buttons you see on your screen to the switches on the side of your phone. For instance, pressing the retweet button on Twitter is the UI that tells Twitter's servers that you want to share this tweet with your followers. An example of a hardware UI is pressing the volume up button on your remote which serves the purpose of simultaneously increasing your tv's volume and letting your roomate know that your have just gotten to the good part of the movie your watching and they should keep it down. 

One thing that I'm sure everyone can agree on is that there are good UI's and there are not so good UI's. If you ever read anything about Stever Jobs you will learn that he was insistent that every product that Apple released had a great User Experience. There is no big secret here, if people don't enjoy interacting with your product they will move on to something else. 

I believe that all great UI's have three things in common; they are intuitive, they do exactly one thing, and they don't let on to the user how they work. One great UI is the Like button on facebook. It is intuitive, pressing the Like button on a post does exactly what you expect it to do. It only does one thing, while liking a post does trigger several events to occur -- sending notifications to the person that created the post and promoting it on your friends newsfeeds -- those are all things that you always want to do at the same time. Liking a photo does not also change your relationship status. Finally, it does not let on to you the user how it works. A good UI is like a barrier between you and the dirty details about how the software works. Everytime you like a post you do not want to be burddened with the details of how Facebook records that Like and sends notifications to your friends, you don't care and you shouldn't. Also, if Facebook ever changes the way that it processes Like's in the future, it shouldn't effect you or the way you use there sofware. 